Scientific Foundations of Psychology
Introspection: examintion of one’s own thoughts and feelings
Structuralism: the idea that the mind operates by combining subjective emotions and objective sensations
Functionalism: the theory that all aspects of a society serve a function and are necessary for the survival of that society.
Psychoanalytic Theory: A theory developed by Freud that attempts to explain personality, motivation, and mental disorders by focusing on unconscious determinants of behavior
Behaviorism: A theoretical orientation based on the premise that scientific psychology should study only observable behavior
Humanist Perspective: stresses individual choice and free will. Believed we choose most of our behaviors and these choices are guided by physiological, emotional, or spiritual needs.
Neuroscience Perspective: how the body and brain enable emotions, memories, and sensory experiences
Evolutionary Perspective: the theory that seeks to identify behavior that is a result of our genetic inheritance from our ancestors
Behavioral Perspective: explain human thought and behavior in terms of conditioning
Gestalt Psychology:Tried to examine a persons total experience because the way we experience the world is more than just an accumulation of various perceptual experiences.
Cognitive Perspective: how we encode, process, store, and retrieve information
Social-Cultural Perspective: how behavior and thinking vary across situations and cultures
Wilhelm Wundt: father of psychology, first psychological laboratory
William James: founder of functionalism; studied how humans use perception to function in our environment
Mary Whiton Calkins: First female president of the APA
Sigmund Freud: Austrian physician whose work focused on the unconscious causes of behavior and personality formation; founded psychoanalysis.
John B. Watson: behaviorism; emphasis on external behaviors of people and their reactions on a given situation; famous for Little Albert study in which baby was taught to fear a white rat
Ivan Pavlov: discovered classical conditioning; trained dogs to salivate at the ringing of a bell
B. F. Skinner: behaviorism; pioneer in operant conditioning; behavior is based on an organism's reinforcement history; worked with pigeons
Charles Darwin: English natural scientist who formulated a theory of evolution by natural selection (1809-1882)
Jean Piaget: Known for his theory of cognitive development in children, ability to remember things over time
Hypothesis: An educated guess
Independent Variable: variable that is manipulated
Dependent Variable: The outcome factor; the variable that may change in response to manipulations of the independent variable.
Theory: A hypothesis that has been tested with a significant amount of data
Validity: the extent to which a test measures or predicts what it is supposed to 
Representative Sample: a sample that accurately reflects the characteristics of the population as a whole
Random Sampling: a method of poll selection that gives each person in a group the same chance of being selected
Stratified Sampling: A type of probability sampling in which the population is divided into groups with a common attribute and a random sample is chosen within each group
Random Assignment: placing research participants into the conditions of an experiment in such a way that each participant has an equal chance of being assigned to any level of the independent variable
Group Matching: researchers attempt to categorize the subjects (by age, health status, gender, ect.) and ensure that the control group has members similar to those in the experimental group

Biological Bases of Behavior 
Neroscience: any or all of the sciences, such as neurochemistry and experimental psychology, which deal with the structure or function of the nervous system and brain.
Neuron: a nerve cell; the basic building block of the nervous system.
Dendrite: the bushy, branching extensions of a neuron that receive messages and conduct impulses toward the cell body.
Axon: the extension of a neuron, ending in branching terminal fibers, through which messages pass to other neurons or to muscles or glands.
Efferent Neurons: neurons that carry outgoing information from the ventral nervous system to the muscles and glands.
Interneurons: central nervous system neurons that internally communicate and intervene between sensory inputs and motor outputs.
Synapse: the junction between the axon tip of the sending neuron and the dendrite or cell body of the receiving neuron. The tiny gap at this junction is called the synaptic gap or cleft.
Action Potential: a neural impulse; a brief electrical charge that travels down an axon. The action potential is generated by the movement of positively charged atoms in and out of channels in the axon's membrane.
Refractory Period: a resting period after orgasm, during which a man cannot achieve another orgasm.
All-Or-Nothing Principle: A neuron will either fire or not; no in between.
Glial Cells: Cells in the nervous system that support, nourish, and protect neurons.
Myelin Shealth: a layer of fatty tissue segmentally encasing the fibers of many neurons; enables vastly greater transmission speed of neural impulses as the impulse hops from one node to the next
Neurotransmitters: chemical messengers that traverse the synaptic gaps between neurons. When released by the sending neuron, neurotransmitters travel across the synapse and bind to receptor sites on the receiving neuron, thereby influencing whether that neuron will generate a neural impulse.
Agonists: mimics a neurotransmitter, like a medication
Antagonists: blocks neurotransmitter
Acetylcholine: ACH- a neurotransmitter that enables learning and memory and also triggers muscle contraction
Norepinephrine: function- physcial arousal, mood, learning
too little = depression, too much= anxiety, high blood pressure
Dopamine: function-pleasure/reward, movement
Seratonin: function- emotional state/mood, sleep
GABA: function- best known inhibitory transmitter, sleep
Glutamate: function-major excitatory neurotransmitter, learning & memory
Endorphins: function- pain control, pleasure
Peripheral Nervous System: the sensory and motor neurons that connect the central nervous system to the rest of the body
Somatic Nervous System: the division of the peripheral nervous system that controls the body's skeletal muscles. Also called skeletal nervous system.
Autonomic Nervous System: the part of the peripheral nervous system that controls the glands and the muscles of the internal organs (such as the heart). Its sympathetic division arouses; its parasympathetic division calms.
Sympathetic Nervous System: the division of the autonomic nervous system that arouses the body, mobilizing its energy in stressful situations.
Parasympathetic Nervous System: the division of the autonomic nervous system that calms the body, conserving its energy.
Central Nervous System: the brain and the spinal cord.
EEG: an amplified recording of the waves of electrical activity that sweep across the brain's surface. These waves are measured by electrodes placed on the scalp
PET: a visual display of brain activity that detects where a radioactive from of glucose goes while the brain performs a given task.
MRI: a technique that uses magnetic fields and radio waves to produce computer-generated images that distinguish among different types of soft tissue; allows us to see structures within the brain.
Lesion: tissue destruction. A brain lesion is a naturally or experimentally caused destruction of brain tissue.
Brainstem: the oldest part and central core of the brain, beginning where the spinal cord swells as it enters the skull; the brainstem is responsible for automatic survival functions.
Medulla: the base of the brainstem; controls heartbeat and breathing.
Reticular Formation: a nerve network in the brainstem that plays an important role in controlling arousal.
Cerebellum: the "little brain" attached to the rear of the brainstem; its functions include processing sensory input and coordinating movement output and balance.
Midbrain: helps to process visual and auditory information
Thalamus: the brain's sensory switchboard, located on top of the brainstem; it directs messages to the sensory receiving areas in the cortex and transmits replies to the cerebellum and medulla
Hypothalamus: a neural structure lying below the thalamus; it directs several maintenance activities (eating, drinking, body temperature), helps govern the endocrine system via the pituitary gland, and is linked to emotion.
Amygdala: two lima bean sized neural clusters that are components of the limbic system and are linked to emotion.
Hippocampus: a neural center located in the limbic system that helps process explicit memories for storage.
Limbic System: a doughnut-shaped system of neural structures at the border of the brainstem and cerebral hemispheres; associated with emotions such as fear and aggression and drives such as those for food and sex. Includes the hippocampus, amygdada, and hypothalamus.
Cerebral Cortex: the intricate fabric of interconnected neural cells that covers the cerebral hemispheres; the body's ultimate control and information-processing center.
Frontal Lobes: the portion of the cerebral cortex lying just behind the forehead; involved in speaking and muscle movements and in making plans and judgements.
Parietal Lobes: the portion of the cerebral cortex lying at the top of the head and toward the rear; receives sensory input for touch and body position.
Occipital Lobes: the portion of the cerebral cortex lying at the back of the head; includes the visual areas, which receive visual information from the opposite visual field.
Temporal Lobes: the portion of the cerebral cortex lying roughly above the ears; includes the auditory areas, each of which receives auditory information primarily from the opposite ears.
Sensory Cortex: the area at the front of the parietal lobes that registers and processes body touch and movement sensations
Motor Cortex: an area at the rear of the frontal lobes that controls voluntary movements.
Broca’s Area: controls language expression- an area of the frontal lobe, usually in the left hemisphere, that directs the muscle movements involved in speech.
Wernicke’s Area: controls language reception- a brain area involved in language comprehension and expression; usually in the left temporal lobe.
Association Areas Cortex: areas of the cerebral cortex that are not involved in primary motor or sensory functions; rather, they are involved in higher mental functions such as learning, remembering, thinking, and speaking.
Corpus Callosum: the large band of neural fibers connecting the two brain hemispheres and carrying messages between them.
Endocrine System: the body's "slow" chemical communication system; a set of glands that secrete hormones into the bloodstream.
Hormones: chemical messengers, mostly those manufactured by the endocrine glands, that are produced in one tissue and affect another.
Adrenal Glands: a pair of endocrine glands just above the kidneys. The adrenals secrete the hormones epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepinephrine (noradrenaline), which help to arouse the body in times of stress.
Pituitary Gland: the endocrine system's most influential gland. Under the influence of the hypothalamus, the pituitary regulates growth and controls other endocrine glands
Split Brain: a condition in which the two hemispheres of the brain are isolated by cutting the connecting fibers (mainly those of the corpus callosum) between them.
Phineas Gage: poles went through his head

Social and Cognitive Aspects
Sensation: Process where sensory receptors and nervous systems take in stimulus from environment
Perception: Process of organizing and interpreting sensory info letting us remember/recognize meaningful things
Bottom-Up Processing: Analysis that begins with basic senses and then works up to brain's interpretation
Top-Down Processing: Where we process info with higher thinking. We construct perceptions based on experience and expectations
Selective Attention: When you focus on one particular thing/stimuli
Inattentional Business: When we can't see visible objects because our attention is elsewhere
Change Blindness: Failing to notice changes in environment
Psychophysics: Study of relationships between the physical characteristics of stimuli (e.g. intensity and our psychological experience of them)
Absolute Threshold: Minimum stimulation needed to detect a particular stimulus 50% of the time
